# helm-charts
Repository for helm charts to deploy the ClearBlade IoT Enterprise platform and monitoring

# ClearBlade IoT Enterprise

The `clearblade-iot-enterprise` Helm chart enables you install an instance of the platform in your own infrastructure. The Helm charts support installing in your own Kubernetes environment, or within Google Cloud.

## Kubernetes

To install in your own Kubernetes cluster please use the `gke-default-values.yaml` file in this repo for configuring this instance. This includes the basic configurations required for installing into a normal Kubernetes environment.

## Google Cloud

When installing ClearBlade IoT Enterprise in Google Cloud, a few different services are leveraged to ensure a secure and optimized install. Specifically you will need these services enabled to successfully deploy:

- Google Kubernetes Engine
- Google Secret Manager
- Google Disk
- Google IP Address
- Google Service Account

Before installing the instance with these Helm charts, the following resources within Google Cloud must be created first:

### Required Resources

#### Kubernetes Cluster

It is recommended to create a Kubernetes Standard Cluster for your deployment, with the following configuration items:

- Regional Cluster
- Specify default node locations (2 zones max)
- Static default version
- Cluster autoscaler enabled
- Min and Max number of nodes per zone set
- Disable Automatically upgrade nodes to next available version
- N2 series machines
- Enable Workload Identify under Cluster Security
- Enable Managed Service for Prometheus under Cluster Features

#### IP Addresses

At minimum you will need 1 static public IP address provisioned to allow access to your ClearBlade IoT Enterprise from the public internet. Optinally a second IP address can be provisioned to enable MQTT connections over port 443. Using both IP addresses is the recommended configuration. These 2 IP addresses should be created in the same Region as your GKE Cluster.

#### Disks

Dedicated Disks are required for persisting data within your ClearBlade IoT Enterprise platform. If you are deploying with a Streaming Replica Postgres instance you will need a dedicated disk for each instance, with the same configuration for each disk. The naming of these disks must also follow a specific pattern, and match the number of Postgres replicas you deploy with:

```
<namespace>-postgres-0
<namespace>-postgres-1
...
```

Type: Regional SSD Persistent Disk  
Size: 100 GB  
Zones: Must match the 2 zones configured in the GKE cluster  
Snapshots: Enabled at your preferred schedule for backup purposes  

#### Secrets

The following 6 Secrets are required, and must follow the specific naming pattern provided, replacing `<namespace>` with the namespcae you are deploying your instance in:

| Secret Name    | Value   |
| -------------- | ------- |
| `<namespace>_clearblade-mek`  | Provided by ClearBlade    |
| `<namespace>_postgres-postgres-password` | Postgres superuser password     |
| `<namespace>_postgres-primary-password`    | Postgres primary password    |
| `<namespace>_postgres-replica-password`    | Postgres replic password    |
| `<namespace>_tls-certificates`    | JSON Object where each key is the filename for a TLS certificate and the value is the base64 encoded pem contents of the cetificate and key.  |
| `<namespace>_filestore-hmac-secret` | A cryptographically secure string |

For example, the `tls-certificates` secrets should look like this:
```
{
    "clearblade-0.pem": "<base64 .pem file>",
    "clearblade-1.pem": "<base64 .pem file>",
}
```

The certificates can be referenced by filename when specifying values for `platformCertName` and `mqttCertName`.

The `filestore-hmac-secret` can be generated by running `openssl rand -hex 32`

#### Service Account

A Service Account is required for successful deployment of your instance. This Service Account is used internally to provide access to the above configured Secrets.

The default name for you Service Account should be `clearblade-gsm-read`. If you want to use a different name for any reason you will need to update this in your values.yaml file, as well as the install command.

This Service Account is required to have the following Roles:

- Secret Manager Admin

### Configuration

After all above resources exists, using the `gke-default-values.yaml` as a starting point, update all configuration values for your specific environment. Note that values for the imagePullerSecret and instance ID will be provided by ClearBlade.

#### ClearBlade TOML configuration

Most commonly used ClearBlade options and configurations can be set directly through a helm value, as shown in the `gke-default-values.yaml` file. These configurations will be set via container flag. However, beginning in helm chart version 3.2.0 and ClearBlade version 2025.2.0, you may add additional configurations not supported in these charts via the `clearbladeConfig` helm value in the ClearBlade section. This is a multiline value that will be read into the `clearblade.toml` configuration file. NOTE: flags will override any configs set with this method.

### Installation

Finally, after connecting to your GKE cluster using the gcloud cli, you will be able to install your instance using the following command, replacing values inside the curly braces to match your environment:

```
helm install clearblade-iot-enterprise https://github.com/ClearBlade/helm-charts/releases/download/clearblade-iot-enterprise-2.13.6/clearblade-iot-enterprise-2.13.6.tgz -f ./my-values.yaml && gcloud --project={gcp project id} iam service-accounts add-iam-policy-binding clearblade-gsm-read@{gcp project id}.iam.gserviceaccount.com --role roles/iam.workloadIdentityUser --member "serviceAccount:{gcp project id}.svc.id.goog[{kubernetes namespace}/clearblade-gsm-read]"
```

# ClearBlade Monitoring

The `clearblade-monitoring` Helm chart is a secondary deployment used to monitor your enterprise instance. To install in your own Kubernetes cluster please use the `gke-default-monitoring-values.yaml` file in this repo for configuring this instance. This includes the basic configurations required for installing into a normal Kubernetes environment.

## GMP

This helm chart is configurable to use either Google Managed Prometheus or a standard Prometheus deployment(reccomended). Be sure that the global value 'GMP' is the same for both monitoring and iot-enterprise deployments in order to ensure the proper exporters and scrape configurations are deployed. Unless you choose to use a Google Managed Prometheus instance, leave GMP set to the default 'false'.

### Required Resources

#### IP Addresses

For monitoring you will need 1 static public IP address provisioned to allow access to your Prometheus and optional Grafana instance from the public internet. This IP address should be created in the same Region as your GKE Cluster.

#### Secrets

You will need one secret, `<monitoring-namespace>_tls-certificates`, containing the TLS Certificate and Key for the monitoring domain you will be accessing your instance at in `.pem` format.

#### Service Account

You will need the same service account credentials as your enterprise deployment. You may reuse that service account for monitoring.

#### Disk

If you are not using GMP, it is reccomended to create a disk for your prometheus data. This is optional, but to use simply include the name of the disk and its size in your monitoring-values yaml file. Create your disk with the following specs

Type: Regional SSD Persistent Disk   
Zones: Must match the 2 zones configured in the GKE cluster  
Snapshots: Enabled at your preferred schedule for backup purposes 

### Configuration & Installation

After all above resources exists, using the `gke-default-monitoring-values.yaml` as a starting point, update all configuration values for your specific environment.

Finally, after connecting to your GKE cluster using the gcloud cli, you will be able to install your monitoring instance using the following command, replacing values inside the curly braces to match your environment (the following assumes your monitoring namespace is simply named monitoring):

```
helm install clearblade-monitoring https://github.com/ClearBlade/helm-charts/releases/download/clearblade-monitoring-2.13.4/clearblade-monitoring-2.13.3.tgz -f ./my-monitoring-values.yaml && gcloud --project={gcp project id} iam service-accounts add-iam-policy-binding clearblade-gsm-read@{gcp project id}.iam.gserviceaccount.com --role roles/iam.workloadIdentityUser --member "serviceAccount:{gcp project id}.svc.id.goog[monitoring/clearblade-gsm-read]" && kubectl annotate serviceaccount clearblade-gsm-read     --namespace=monitoring     iam.gke.io/gcp-service-account=clearblade-gsm-read@{gcp project id}-os.iam.gserviceaccount.com

```


# Blue Green updates

## About

This document describes how to update your ClearBlade platform version in a blue/green style to prevent downtime and forced disconnects. It involves adding new ClearBlade pods/containers to your cluster, running the desired version, and having a transitional period while devices naturally reconnect to the newer pods. This comes at the cost of time and compute but should involve no service interruptions.

In our Kubernetes deployments, traffic is routed from the load balancer to ClearBlade through a Kubernetes service. By using labels in Kubernetes, we can limit the scope of this service to ClearBlade pods running only the desired version. Existing connections will persist, while new connections will only be established with the new ClearBlade version. Eventually, all devices will be connected to the new pods, and you can remove the existing pods.

## Requirements

Helm charts version 2.13.6 or newer

ClearBlade version 9.34.0 or newer (before update)

The following versions are unskippable - meaning you cannot jump from a prior version to a later version in a blue green fashion, without first updating to these versions (i.e. you cannot go directly from 9.34.1 to 9.34.3)

9.34.0

9.34.2

## Steps

These steps assume a blue-to-green transition. To transition from green back to blue for a second update, replace instances of `global.enterpriseGreenVersion` with `global.enterpriseBlueVersion` and instances of `clearblade.greenReplicas` with `blueReplicas` and vice versa. The replica and version values are applied to the blue pod set but are not explicitly named blue. For step 3, change the slot value to blue instead of green.

In your values file used to deploy ClearBlade with helm, set `global.enterpriseGreenVersion` to the platform version you want to upgrade to. Then, in the ClearBlade section, set `clearblade.greenReplicas` to the desired number of pods.

Run 

`helm upgrade <deployment name> -f <path to values file> <path to clearblade-iot-enterprise tgz file>`

This will start your green pod set running the desired version. Wait for them to run, and optionally wait for them to finish autobalancing (see logs).

A useful helm plugin is helm-diff. With it installed, you can run the above command with ‘diff’ added (helm diff upgrade ….). This will not upgrade your deployment but instead show you the changes that will be made so you can be sure you are only making intended changes.

Update your values file to set `global.enterpriseSlot` to `green`. If not set, this value defaults to blue.

Run the upgrade command above again. This will update your clearblade-service to route new connections to the new green set of ClearBlade pods instead of the existing old set. Before updating the service, your green pods must be running to establish new connections immediately.

You are now in a transitional state and running two versions of ClearBlade simultaneously. Existing connections to the old ClearBlade set will persist while new connections connect to the new set. Stay in this state until all devices have reconnected to the new set for minimal interruption.

You may change the `blueReplicas` value to 0, run the upgrade command, and exclusively run the new version and be done with your update.

## NOTE
The console and file hosting version, beginning in helm charts 3.1.11, is controlled by `global.enterpriseConsoleVersion`, and must be manually updated in addition to the platform version. This value can be updated prior to any of the helm upgrade commands above, which will restart those 2 containers and run the new version.


# GDC

In order to install this platform on a GDC air-gapped environment, a minumum of helm chart version 3.4.2 is required. Using the gdc-default-values.yaml template file, follow the following steps to deploy:

## Steps

Upload the required images to Harbor or your local image repositories. ClearBlade minimum version 2025.3.1 is required.

Fill out the template yaml file with the required image repositories and tags. Aquire mekfile and license from ClearBlade, and place in corresponding helm value overrides.

Create an image puller secret and place base64 encoded into values yaml file

Set your desired resource requests and limits.

Run

`helm install <release-name> -f <path to values yaml file> <path to clearblade-iot-enterprise tgz file> --namespace <desired namespace to host helm deployment>`

Create DNS record of your base URL at the external IP of the cb-haproxy-service

You should now be able to access the dev console from within your air-gapped network at your baseURL/console . You can register using your set registration key and grant yourself admin priveledge by running `clearblade setadmin user@example.com` on any running ClearBlade container.


# CNPG

## Install Plugins (Once per cluster)

kubectl apply -f https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager/releases/latest/download/cert-manager.yaml

kubectl apply --server-side -f \
    https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cloudnative-pg/cloudnative-pg/release-1.27/releases/cnpg-1.27.1.yaml

kubectl apply -f \
    https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/plugin-barman-cloud/releases/download/v0.11.0/manifest.yaml

## Verify plugins

kubectl rollout status deployment -n cnpg-system cnpg-controller-manager
kubectl rollout status deployment -n cnpg-system barman-cloud
kubectl rollout status deployment -n cert-manager cert-manager

## Steps

1. Create GCP Bucket
    Name must be globally unique. Add the name to global.bucket in this form: gs://my-bucket-name
2. Add Workload Identity IAM binding

    The CNPG Cluster creates a Kubernetes Service Account named `cb-postgres` in your namespace. This KSA is automatically annotated with your GCP service account via `serviceAccountTemplate` in the Helm chart. You need to create the corresponding IAM binding so the KSA can authenticate to GCS:

    ```
    gcloud iam service-accounts add-iam-policy-binding \
      <gcpGSMServiceAccount>@<gcpProject>.iam.gserviceaccount.com \
      --role roles/iam.workloadIdentityUser \
      --member "serviceAccount:<gcpProject>.svc.id.goog[<namespace>/cb-postgres]"
    ```

    The GCP service account also requires the following role on the GCS bucket (or at the project level):

    - `roles/storage.admin`

    Note: `roles/storage.objectAdmin` alone is not sufficient - it lacks `storage.buckets.get` which is required by the barman cloud plugin.

3. Configure values

    Using the `gke-default-values.yaml` as a reference, set the CNPG-related global values in your values file. See the [CNPG Values Reference](#cnpg-values-reference) section below for details on each value.

    At minimum you must set:
    ```yaml
    global:
      dynamicVolumes: true
      pgReplicas: 3
      bucket: gs://your-bucket-name
      schedule: '0 0 */6 * * *'
      pass: <your-cbuser-password>
    ```

4. Install

    ```
    helm install clearblade-iot-enterprise <path-to-chart> -f ./my-values.yaml
    ```

    On a fresh install, the CNPG operator will:
    - Create a `Cluster` resource with the specified number of replicas
    - Dynamically provision PVCs and PVs for each replica (no pre-created disks needed)
    - Initialize the `admin` database with `cbuser` as owner
    - Install extensions (pg_stat_statements, pg_trgm, and optionally timescaledb)
    - Start WAL archiving to your GCS bucket
    - Take an initial base backup
    - Begin scheduled backups on your cron schedule

    The backup destination folder inside the bucket is determined by `global.folder` (defaults to `clearblade`). This folder structure is created automatically by the barman cloud plugin on the first backup - you do not need to create it manually. The folder contains both base backups and WAL archives.

5. Set `restored: true` for subsequent deploys

    After your initial deployment is running and has taken at least one successful backup, update your values file to set `global.restored: true`. This ensures that if the cluster is ever torn down and re-created (e.g. during a nodepool migration or disaster recovery), the CNPG operator will bootstrap from the most recent backup in your GCS bucket rather than initializing a fresh empty database.

    ```yaml
    global:
      restored: true
    ```

    If you ever need to start completely fresh (new empty database), set `restored: false` and point to a new bucket or folder.

6. Import an existing database (optional)

    If you are migrating from a single-pod PostgreSQL deployment to CNPG, you can import your data using `pg_restore` after the cluster is running.

    <!-- TODO: Detail pg_restore import process -->


## CNPG Values Reference

All CNPG-related values are documented in `gke-default-values.yaml`. Here is a summary:

### Global Values

| Value | Required | Default | Description |
|-------|----------|---------|-------------|
| `global.dynamicVolumes` | Yes | `false` | Set to `true` to enable CNPG HA Postgres. When `false`, the legacy single-pod StatefulSet is used. |
| `global.pgReplicas` | Yes | - | Number of PostgreSQL replicas (e.g. `3`). Replicas are spread across nodes via pod anti-affinity. |
| `global.bucket` | Yes | - | GCS bucket path for backups. Format: `gs://bucket-name` |
| `global.folder` | No | `clearblade` | Server name / folder within the bucket. The backup directory structure is created automatically. Use a unique value per deployment if sharing a bucket. |
| `global.schedule` | Yes | - | Cron schedule for automated backups. 6-field format: `'0 0 */6 * * *'` (every 6 hours). |
| `global.pass` | Yes (fresh) | - | Password for the `cbuser` database user. Only used during `initdb` (fresh install). |
| `global.restored` | No | `false` | Set to `true` to bootstrap from a GCS backup instead of initializing fresh. |
| `global.nodepoolSlot` | No | - | Node selector slot label for CNPG pod placement. |
| `global.disableTimescale` | No | `false` | Set to `true` to skip installing the TimescaleDB extension. |

### cb-postgres Values

| Value | Required | Default | Description |
|-------|----------|---------|-------------|
| `cb-postgres.storageSize` | No | `100Gi` | PVC size for each PostgreSQL replica. |
| `cb-postgres.maxConnections` | No | `500` | PostgreSQL `max_connections` parameter. |
| `cb-postgres.sharedBuffers` | No | `2GB` | PostgreSQL `shared_buffers` parameter. |
| `cb-postgres.workMem` | No | `64MB` | PostgreSQL `work_mem` parameter. |
| `cb-postgres.walMaxParallel` | No | `8` | Number of parallel WAL upload workers. |
| `cb-postgres.retentionPolicy` | No | - | Backup retention policy (e.g. `30d` for 30 days). If not set, backups are retained indefinitely. |
| `cb-postgres.requestCPU` | No | `1` | CPU request per replica. |
| `cb-postgres.requestMemory` | No | `4G` | Memory request per replica. |
| `cb-postgres.limitCPU` | No | `1` | CPU limit per replica. |
| `cb-postgres.limitMemory` | No | `4G` | Memory limit per replica. |

## How It Works

When `global.dynamicVolumes` is set to `true`, the Helm chart deploys a CNPG `Cluster` resource instead of the legacy single-pod StatefulSet. The CNPG operator manages the full lifecycle of the PostgreSQL cluster:

- **High Availability**: Multiple replicas with streaming replication. The operator automatically handles primary election and replica promotion. If the primary fails, a replica is promoted with no manual intervention.
- **Dynamic Volumes**: PVCs are provisioned automatically by the operator using the specified storage class. No pre-created GCE disks or PersistentVolume resources are needed.
- **Continuous Backup**: WAL files are continuously archived to GCS via the barman cloud plugin (running as a sidecar container). Scheduled base backups are taken on your configured cron schedule.
- **Restore**: When `restored: true`, the operator bootstraps a new cluster by fetching the latest base backup and replaying WAL files from GCS, recovering to the most recent consistent state.
- **Service Discovery**: CNPG creates services automatically: `cb-postgres-rw` (read-write, always points to primary), `cb-postgres-ro` (read-only replicas), and `cb-postgres-r` (all replicas). The ClearBlade platform connects to `cb-postgres-rw`.

## Manual Backups

To take an on-demand backup, apply a `Backup` resource with a unique name:

```
kubectl apply -n <namespace> -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: postgresql.cnpg.io/v1
kind: Backup
metadata:
  name: backup-$(date +%s)
  namespace: <namespace>
spec:
  cluster:
    name: cb-postgres
  method: plugin
  pluginConfiguration:
    name: barman-cloud.cloudnative-pg.io
EOF
```

Each backup gets a unique name via the timestamp suffix. You can take as many manual backups as needed - they accumulate in the GCS bucket independently. To check backup status:

```
kubectl get backups -n <namespace>
```

## kubectl cnpg Plugin

The `cnpg` kubectl plugin provides convenience commands for managing CNPG clusters. Install it with:

```
curl -sSfL https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/cloudnative-pg/raw/main/hack/install-cnpg-plugin.sh | sh
```

**Important**: All `kubectl cnpg` commands require the `-n <namespace>` flag to work.

### Common Commands

```bash
# Cluster status overview
kubectl cnpg status cb-postgres -n <namespace>

# Detailed status with replication info
kubectl cnpg status cb-postgres -n <namespace> --verbose

# Promote a replica to primary (for planned switchover)
kubectl cnpg promote cb-postgres <replica-number> -n <namespace>

# List backups
kubectl get backups -n <namespace>

# Check cluster conditions and events
kubectl describe cluster cb-postgres -n <namespace>

# View CNPG operator logs
kubectl logs -n cnpg-system deployment/cnpg-controller-manager -f
```